Investigating Data Exfiltration

Robert Weiland

[00:00:00] Hi there. This is Robert Weiland with the Sophos Incident Response 
team. In this video, we're going to be looking at a Sophos Central console where there's suspicion 
that data exfiltration has taken place recently. First, we're going to go to the Live Discover menu, 
where we'll be able to run some queries against the systems that are suspected of being involved in 
the data exfil. 

 I want to start with a data lake query called Search for Network Traffic Data, and we want to search 
for systems that have a local IP of 10.10.10. And that last octet, I am just going to leave that as a wild 
card. And we'll search for the last 30 days. 

Great. That's returned some data. Let's export it to Excel and take a look. 

Let's sort by processes being run by the administrator. 

And here we can see that on July the 31st, that Rclone was executed. So Rclone is [00:01:00] a file- 
transfer tool that is often abused by ransomware threat actors. 

So now that we've sorted it just to look for only the Rclone executions, we can see that those took 
place on the file server on July 31st. 

And we can see the IP addresses associated as well as the Sophos Process ID, and also the SHA256 
hash. What we can do is we can copy this and see what exactly is this file? Is it actually Rclone? Or is 
it something else? 

So you can see here, we're on VirusTotal. I have entered the hash from the Excel spreadsheet here, 
and we can see that we've got positive confirmation that this is indeed Rclone that we're dealing 
with. 

So if we go back to our spreadsheet that we collected from the data lake earlier, we can see that it's 
captured a number of IP addresses as well, that were related to that Rclone process. So we're just 
going to check that against VirusTotal to see who that IP address is registered to. 
All right.

So [00:02:00] we entered that on VirusTotal. If we go to details, we can see here that this IP 
address is registered to mega.co.nz, and Mega is a cloud storage service that threat actors use quite 
frequently in their exfiltration. So this lines up with the typical MO that we would see in many 
ransomware cases. 

Going back to the spreadsheet, we can see that the folder that's being interacted with is called 
C:/Data. So we probably want to understand what is it that's contained here, because that looks to 
be what was exfiltrated. So the next thing we'll do is look at what data is contained here. 
So the query we're going to run is called File Attributes and Metadata, and this is a little bit different 
than the previous query that we ran, because this is an EDR query. So it's actually touching forensic 
journals that are on the system itself, as opposed to data that had been uploaded to the cloud, to 
our data lake. 

And we just want to search for [00:03:00] FileServer1. So we're going to select that 
because now we're actually targeting data that's on this system itself and we will run that query.
Okay. Great. So that query returned some data; let's go up and see what it found. And we can see 
that there are four files within the data directory. And if we scroll over to the right a little bit, we can 
also see the size here. So it's in byte format. It hasn't been converted to gigabytes, but we can take a 
guess; this looks about five and a half gigabytes. This is about almost five, and then five and a half. 
So a significant amount of data within this directory. The next step is going to be to pivot over to 
another query and look at the network journals and see if we see a quantity of data that might 
match up to about the amount of bytes we see right here.

All right. So let's go to the top of the screen. 

Going to look for another endpoint query called All Traffic Sent. 

Okay. So now we just need to update the start time and end [00:04:00] time here to look at the 
timeframe when Rclone was running, which was 1400 hours. And we'll just look for one hour of time 
here and run that query. 

 Okay. We got some data back. Scroll up here and we can see that we have about 21 gigabytes of 
data that was exfiltrated. That about matches up with the bytes that we saw earlier, where we were 
seeing approximately five gigabytes or more, more or less, for four files. So could say that this could 
be accurate here. This looks like there was data exfiltration because that matches up with that 
malicious Rclone command that we saw and that was executed by the administrator account.
Next we're going to go back to the spreadsheet that we had from the first query that we ran on the 
data lake. And we're just going to grab the Sophos PID. So this is the process identifier. And we're 
going to run a query to look at what files in the file system were accessed by that process. So just go 
back here to All Queries. 

And we're going to go with File System [00:05:00] Interactions for a Sophos PID. 

 We know what timeframe that we want to look at here. So I've entered in there July 31st, 1400 to 
1500, that same one-hour period of time. We want to know what did Rclone do? What files did it 
touch when it was running on that day? So we'll run that. 

All right. So we got some data back here, still populating. And just because this is so much data to 
look at, we're going to export this to a CSV, where we can manipulate the data a little easier. 
Okay. So now that we have the data in an Excel spreadsheet, let's filter it. 

And we can see here that the four files that were contained inside the C:/Data directory are listed 
here; they were accessed by the Rclone process.

In this case, this query is not really all that interesting, but you could imagine that in a scenario 
where there were a lot more files in a directory that was targeted by a threat actor doing exfiltration 
where there were maybe 10,000 files, this query could be really helpful for identifying which files 
within [00:06:00] that directory were indeed touched by the malicious process and which ones were 
not.

The last query that we're gonna run is one that will look at lateral movement, and it's called Remote 
Desktop Login Events. So we'll go back to our All Queries and search for that.

And we know it was an administrator and don't know the source IP. So that's what we wanna find 
out. And where did this log on come from? All right, so the query finished. So we can see that there 
was one authentication to FileServer1 on July 31st at 1652 UTC with the administrator account 
coming from 10.10.10.5, which is a workstation in this network.

So if we go back over to Excel here and look at the UTC timeframe for when Rclone was run, we can 
see that was actually shortly after that log [00:07:00] on event. So if we go back and look at the time 
-- 1652 -- and go back to Excel and we can see that it's 1658. So the threat actor wasted no time in 
executing Rclone after logging on as administrator.

So there we go. Now we know where the threat actor came from. So that could mean some type of 
compromise on that system itself, potentially, a phishing email or some other type of compromise 
that happened upstream. And then we would need to go to this system and then look for lateral 
movement coming from the VPN or some other system in the network that was initially 
compromised or previously compromised.

To recap, we were able to use Sophos Central to pull data from the data lake as well as the EDR that 
was installed on FileServer1 to investigate a data exfiltration incident. Most notably, we were able to 
determine the tool that was used for the exfiltration as well as the files that [00:08:00] were touched 
by that process and the volume of data that was taken.

So, hope that you found this video helpful. From me and the whole Sophos X-Ops team, take care 
and stay secure.
